--- author: Nathaniel categories: \[\] date: "2014-08-15T02:56:00Z"
meta: tumblr\_landlaborcapital\_id: "94783194772"
tumblr\_landlaborcapital\_permalink:
http://landlaborcapital.tumblr.com/post/94783194772/historic-aggregate-data-for-korea-1910-1945-and
published: true status: publish tags: - datasets - economic history -
historic data - korea - links title: Historic Aggregate Data for Korea,
1910-1945 -- and beyond. type: post ---

[Historic Aggregate Data for Korea, 1910-1945 -- and
beyond.](http://www.naksung.re.kr/xe/egk)

<div class="link_description">

[Here is a cool batch of datasets (mainly aggregates!) from Korea’s
Nakseongdae Institute of Economic
Research](http://www.naksung.re.kr/xe/egk "Historic Economic Data Korea"),
one of which is a nice collection of material covering the colonial
Japanese period of Korea (1910-1945). \[Just run that sucker through
Google translate.\]

If you’re doing data work in economic history, your life is messy. Even
more, if you’re doing historical work for a developing
country, ***finding** *the data is often a massive part of the job. Data
is hidden. Maybe on microfilm, if you’re lucky. Perhaps lost, missing or
buried in an archive. Heck, the data may have even been destroyed by
a [utopian Communist
regime](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khmer_Rouge_rule_of_Cambodia). But
really, the biggest problem is data legibility: we simply don’t know
where foreign, historic data ***is***.

As opposed to doing Western economic history, there isn’t a “users
group” for core historic data (unless we’re talking about the Murdoch
map). For instance, if you sit in an economic history seminar/workshop
in Cambridge, you quickly realize how much general advice there is
regarding old US census material. However, for the developing world, in
particular Africa (again, unless we’re talking about the Murdoch map GIS
file), East, Near East, Southeast Asia, you’re a bit screwed. The least
of which is because of a language barrier and an economic history
community far, far away from you—if it exists at all.

That said, I’m going to post historic electronic data resources I find
for the developing world. I am working on a long term project on Asian
structural change with wonderful folks at Harvard, Tufts, and NYU, so we
come across some cool stuff from time to time.

If you find anything cool, or have a dataset to share, email
me: [](nlane@fas.harvard.edu)

<div class="media image">

![image](%7B%7B%20site.baseurl%20%7D%7D/assets/614ae228bf51e8ec03352e1c00861621.png "Email image created with safemail.justlikeed.net")

</div>

</div>
